---
title: "The whole Shebang"
date: 2025-12-01
---

# The whole Shebang

You might have noticed that many scripts begins with lines like these:

```sh
#!/bin/sh
#!/bin/bash
#!/usr/bin/env python3
```

But what are they and how does it work.
It looks like just a comment since the lines starts with `#` but there is
actually a bit more meaning to it.

> [!NOTE]
> In case you don't know; comments in scripts are lines that doesn't
> get executed as part of the script.
> It can be used to provide context for humans reading the script.

If the first line of a scripts starts with `#!`, it's called a shebang.
The line specifies the absolute path of the command that should be used to
interpret the script.
So if you have the line `#!/bin/sh` it means that it is a simple shell script.
Where `/bin/sh` is intended to be compatible with the [Bourne
shell](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bourne_shell) introduced in Version 7 UNIX
in 1979.
Many modern Linux flavours have `/bin/sh` being provided by the Bash (short for
"Bourne Again SHell") shell.
Bash is like a superset of Bourne shell.

There are many other shells such as
[zsh](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Z_shell),
[tcsh](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tcsh) and
[fish](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fish_(Unix_shell)).

Let's see it in action.
We start by creating a file named `hello.sh` this:

```sh
cat > hello.sh << EOF
#!/bin/sh
echo "Hello World"
EOF
```

> [!TIP]
> The funky looking `<< EOF` denotes a
> [Heredoc](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/linux-unix/how-to-use-heredoc-in-shell-scripting/)
> which is simply just a way to make multiple-line input.

We can make it executable (`+x`) by changing the file mode bits (`chmod`):

```sh
chmod +x hello.sh
```

Now we can run the script by typing:

```sh
./hello.sh
```

We can also use the shebang trick to write scripts for a different interpreter.
Let's try with Python.

```sh
cat > hello.py << EOF
#!/usr/bin/python
print("Hello World")
EOF
chmod +x hello.py
./hello.py
```

Because there are two versions of Python (2 and 3) that a incompatible we
should be specific on what version by changing the shebang to
`#!/usr/bin/python3`.
To improve compatibility, because Python 3 executable might not exist on the
path `/usr/bin/python3` on all Linux flavours (like NixOS), we really should be
using `#!/usr/bin/env python3`.
The `env` command will lookup and execute a command with the given name.

Therefore the final version of our Python script, which should work on most
distributions, will be:

```sh
cat > hello.py << EOF
#!/usr/bin/env python3
print("Hello World")
EOF
chmod +x hello.py
./hello.py
```

Stay tuned for more tips...
