---
title: Something if-fi
date: 2025-12-04
---

We often need ways to branch the execution in our scripts.
Do one thing or another based on a condition.
A simple way to to this is with the if-then syntax.

```
if [ condition ]; then
  # execute something
fi
# continue here
```

Read as: if condition is met then execute something.

Maybe we want to check that certain conditions are met before executing the
command.
Say we have a script that requires two arguments.
We can bail out with a helpful error message if not exactly two are given using an `if`.

```sh
#!/bin/bash
if [[ "$#" -ne 2 ]]; then
    echo "Usage: $0 <username> <password>"
    exit 1
fi
# Continue with login
```

The script will exit with a helpful error message if not exactly two arguments
are given.
The `-ne` part means not equal.
There is also `-eq` for equal, `-gt` for greater-than and `-lt` for less-than.
You can compare strings with `==` for equal and `!=` for not-equal.
You can even make conditions based on [regular
expressions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression) with `=~`.
See
[here](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/html_node/Conditional-Constructs.html#index-_005b_005b)
for more details.

> [!CAUTION]
> Don't write or use scripts that accepts a password as argument like above.
> This is because the password will then end up in your command history
> (`.bash_history`).

A safe way of accepting password input is:

```sh
read -s -p "Password: " password
```

Then access it through the `$password` variable.

**If..elif..Else statement**

We can use `elif` to specify alternative conditions.
And `else` for commands to run if neither conditions match.
Here is an example:

```sh
#!/bin/bash
if [[ "$#" -eq 1 ]]; then
  read -s -p "Password: " password
elif [[ "$#" -eq 2 ]]; then
  username=$1
  password=$2
else
  echo "Usage: $0 <username>"
  exit 1
fi
echo "Login..."
```

**Exit codes**

Also, and interesting thing to note with `exit 1` is that we exit with a
exit-code of `1`.
Exit codes are used for error handling.
All exit-codes except `0` is considered an error.
If you just type `[[ 1 -ne 1 ]]` directly in bash, you get an exit code of `1`,
signaling that the conditions isn't true.

You can check the last exit code with:

```sh
echo $?
```

# Challenge

Create a script that checks if it is Christmas-eve.

**Hint:** Run "`man date`" in your terminal.
