---
title: Trippy colors
date: 2025-12-10
---

You've probably notices that some commands can output colorful text in the
terminal.
Here is how to do it yourself.

Here is a teaser.

```sh
echo -e "\e[32mHello World\e[0m"
```

## Background

It gets a bit technical.

The `-e` flag makes `echo` interpret backslash escapes.
With it we can type in `\` followed by a character code to output
none-printable characters.

You see, terminals are based on the ASCII standard for encoding character.
Each symbol shown on the screen needs to be encoded in binary somehow.
ASCII is just a way to encode those.

[ASCII table](https://www.asciitable.com/) shows how characters are encoded.

Instead of writing long sequences like "00001010" for "a" it is common to use
either decimal (0-255), hex (00-ff) or octal (000-377) to represent a byte.
Btw ASCII only uses 7-bits, so the last bit have been used for various
extensions including UTF-8.

The letter "a" has the character code 61 in hex or 141 in octal.
It can be printed using a backslash sequence:

```sh
# hex
echo -e "\x61"

# octal
echo -e "\0141"
```

Not terrible exiting, but it illustrates the idea.

To do something a bit more fun, we can try to ring the terminal bell.
It will either make a sound or give a visual clue depending on your terminal
emulator.

```sh
echo -e "\x07"
```

If we echo the character code for escape, then we can use a special sequence to
control how the terminal prints characters.

```sh
echo -e "\033[1mHello World"
```

Where "\033" is escape and "[1m" is a control code to make text bold.

Because "\033" is annoying to remember, there is also the shortcut "\e".

## Fun stuff

_**Note:** support depends on your terminal._

To set **foreground** color to red:

```sh
echo -e "\e[31mRed"
```

To set **background** color to red:

```sh
echo -e "\e[41mRed"
```

Here is a table of the standard colors.

| Color | Foreground | Background |
| ------------- | -------------- | -------------- |
| Black | 30 | 40 |
| Red | 31 | 41 |
| Green | 32 | 42 |
| Yellow | 33 | 33 |
| Blue | 34 | 44 |
| Magenta | 35 | 45 |
| Cyan | 36 | 46 |
| Gray | 37 | 47 |

Depending on your terminal, it might also be possible to go full RGB mode.

```sh
echo -e "\e[38;2;255;192;203mPink"
```

_RGB color (255, 192, 203) for pink._

We can also change the text in various other ways.
Here are some examples:

```sh
echo -e "\e[1m Bold"
echo -e "\e[3m Italic"
echo -e "\e[4m Underline"
echo -e "\e[5m Slow blink"
echo -e "\e[6m Fast blink"
```

Last, use "\e[0m" to reset.

```sh
echo -e "\e[32mColor \e[0mReset"
```

[See full list](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ANSI_escape_code#Select_Graphic_Rendition_parameters)
