---
title: global, regular expression, print
date: 2025-12-16
---

The `grep` command is one of those fundamental commands.
We've already gotten a sneak peek of `grep` on [Dec 8](8), as it is hard to
come up with good examples for pipes without it.

Grep is short for "global, regular expression, print".

Where the `find` command allows you to search for files, then `grep` searches
in text.

You might have heard about [regular
expression](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression) if you've done
programming in another language.
Because most languages supports it in some form.

Let's create a file with some text, so we have something to use as input.

```
cat > unix-philosophy.txt << EOF
Write programs that do one thing and do it well.
Write programs to work together.
Write programs to handle text streams, because that is a universal interface.
EOF
```

We can then use `grep` look for the word "text".

```sh
cat unix-philosophy.txt | grep text
```

Here, `grep` searches through the text it gets from `stdin`.
This similar to how we saw it used on [Dec 8](8) with `lshw`.

If we are only interested in searching for text in a file, then we can just
pass the filename to `grep` directly.

```sh
grep text unix-philosophy.txt
```

Another common use case for `grep` is to look for processes.

```sh
ps aux | grep bash
```

Where `ps aux` list all running processes.

This is so common that some systems provide a combined command for it called
`pgrep`.

```sh
pgrep -a bash
```

Does (almost) the same.

## Regular expression

What about the regular expression part?
We can use grep to search for a pattern, instead of searching an exact
sub-string.

```sh
grep th. unix-philosophy.txt
```

Where "." matches any single character.

It can also match on lines ending with something.

```sh
grep 'er\.$' unix-philosophy.txt
```

Where `$` means the end of a line.
Notice `\.` because otherwise it would also match lines ending with "er?".

We can also use `^` for beginning.

```sh
grep '^Write' unix-philosophy.txt
```

Not very interesting as all lines start with the same.

When grepping for patterns, I like to use `grep -P` because it makes it more
consistent with the regular expressions in other programming languages.

Let's add another line to our file.

```sh
echo "This is the UNIX-philosophy." >> unix-philosophy.txt
```

Say we want all lines that contain "this" or "that", we can use `|`.

```sh
grep -P -i "this|that" unix-philosophy.txt
```

The `-i` flag makes it case-insensitive.

You can learn more about Perl style regex
[here](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/perl/perl-regex-cheat-sheet/).
